
With pluck , daring and less than a dozen troopers , he invaded Mozambique and attacked the Portuguese garrison at Vila de Manica . Determined to seize the port of Beira for the Crown , his plan was thwarted by British Prime Minister Salisbury who wasted no time in ordering Forbes to desist and return to British territory immediately . Unbeknown to Forbes , the attack was a breach of a non - aggression pact between Portugal and Britain that had not been violated in several hundred years . (None, 214)


surprisimg that there was not more fighting between the colonial powers in south africa. (None, 217)


Nevertheless , pro rata as a percentage of the white population , Rhodesia contributed more manpower to the Second World War and suffered greater casualties than any other country in the Empire , including Great Britain herself . Because so many volunteered there was a real fear at official level that big Rhodesian losses would decimate their numbers to such an extent the future of the colony would be in jeopardy . As a result the Rhodesian volunteers were deliberately distributed throughout the various services to spread the risk as widely as possible . (None, 242)


I reached a point where I became highly effective with my 30.06 . (None, 319)


peter walls, who eventually commanded the whole rhodesian army, got his start in the war in malaya. (None, 383)


In the middle of 1962 Rhodesian SAS troops were sent to Northern Rhodesia’s border with the Congo to assist Belgian refugees fleeing independence atrocities . This spectacle would have a profound effect on soldiers and civilians alike when , three years later , Southern Rhodesia was told to submit to a timetable for black majority rule . (None, 390)


“ On more than one occasion , ” Ian Smith recalled , “ Harold Wilson implored me to appreciate the wonders of being English . It was simply beyond his comprehension that we did not want to be English and fully integrated into their establishment . The fact that we actually preferred to be Rhodesians was seen as an outrageous affront . ” (None, 436)


I was in peak physical fitness then from running about twenty kilometres a day hunting animals . (None, 465)


In the critically important area of shooting the SAS instructors were well aware that the majority of exchanges were taking place at close range with the enemy invariably hugging the ground . We therefore deviated from conventional shooting drills which encouraged a ‘ shoot - high ’ tendency , with targets consistently just above ground level on the ranges . ” (None, 502)


There is no substitute for the hard work of tracking through whatever terrain and for whatever distance until you find the people you need to destroy . For a lot of guys I think the strain of an extended follow - up was too much . (None, 576)


“ The Squadron was fortunate to have several young soldiers who hunted for a living before joining the military , ” says Robinson . “ Darrell Watt , Hennie Pretorius and André Rabie were typical of the bush men of the early days . (None, 702)


Savory had made me think and I asked Brian Robinson if I and my pal Archie Moore could go to a political meeting he was going to address . Brian said fine but to keep your mouths shut . I was very taken by Savory’s ideas on finding a political solution that would prevent war . We’ll never know if that was really possible but I often wonder about it . ” (None, 737)


Early 1972 the spirit medium , or ‘ witchdoctor , ’ Mbuya Nehanda , 34 an old crone living in the Dande Tribal Trust Lands close to the Mozambican border , was approached by ZANLA and carried in a blanket to Chifombo in Mozambique close to the Zambian border . The ZANLA leadership was acutely aware of the value of the spirit mediums or witchdoctors and her connection with the Chimurenga War of 1896 considerably elevated her status in the eyes of the peasantry . She was a critically important conversion to the cause and her association with ZANLA boosted recruitment within the border areas of Rhodesia . (None, 775)


Bushcraft survival skills were no help there because there was nothing to eat . We hankered for the leaves on the baobabs but could not shin up the trunks . I ended up eating used teabags after they had been brewed several times . ” (None, 952)


Looking back I’m not so sure there should have been two special forces units competing against one another rather than having everyone under one roof . (None, 1191)


“ Metallic shine was a big factor . We learnt to dull absolutely everything ; a lesson lost on the enemy . So often the glint of sunlight on the magazines of the AKs gave them away . If I sensed there was a presence close by I would sit and watch the area for hours and let the sun move . Sooner or later , I’d pick up a glint of metal and then I would know their position . It was a deadly giveaway that paid off many times . (None, 1223)


“ At night we would lie dead still and strain our ears for the sound of frogs , which would give us some idea of where to look for water . There was great excitement when we heard a croak , ” (None, 1276)


“ One group of four blokes decided no one was to leave the bar until they had drunk enough to surround the swimming pool with empty beer bottles . It was a big pool and it took them three days of hard work . When they could no longer stand they lay down on the floor and slept until rested , then got up and carried on drinking . Very sensible , thought - provoking stuff . ” (None, 1325)


Among the booty were recent photographs showing the enemy frolicking in the snow - filled streets of Leningrad . (None, 1778)


One prisoner let it be known that the bulk of the ‘ comrades ’ were ready and merely awaiting the onset of the rains , which would give them the cover to infiltrate Rhodesia . (None, 1820)


“ When I was an officer cadet , ” recalled Brian Robinson , “ I believed the generals made the plans and gave directives . Not so with us . Unit commanders and their intelligence staff did all the ferreting for information , prepared the plan and then had to sell it to the ‘ ComOps ’ 61 commander and his top advisers . (None, 1828)


At nearby Chimoio , apart from the Frelimo garrison , there was a company of Tanzanian troops and more than one hundred Soviet advisers . Equipped with T - 54 tanks , BTR - 152 armoured personnel carriers and SAM - 7 batteries , they would more than likely also have to be dealt with . Tembué , farther north , housed an estimated 5 , 000 men under arms . (None, 1833)


baboons were strategically placed and watched by sentries . It was believed that their senses were better tuned than those of humans , and any restive behaviour from the animals was to be considered a possible indication of imminent attack . (None, 1883)


Radio intercepts indicated 3,500 dead and approximately the same number wounded . The Rhodesians had lost one soldier and one pilot . It was a feat of epic military proportions , possibly unequalled in history . Never before had so few battled so many . On the ground , less than 200 had taken on 10,000 , and scored a decisive victory . When news of the routing of Chimoio reached Mugabe , he reportedly came close to throwing in the towel . Commiserating with his close confidant Edgar Tekere , he confessed he was “ beginning to wonder if this armed struggle is worth pursuing . ” 69 (None, 2156)


Alarm followed with the appearance in the sky of a circling MiG - 21 and wary eyes on the ground watched the circling jet . A Hunter pilot , itching for the chance , asked for permission to engage but was told to maintain a close eye and react only if he detected hostile intent . The Zambian fighter did one more circle , reported being low on fuel then left the area without incident . (None, 2857)


“ While waiting for the DC - 7 , we started worrying less about the enemy and more about lions . We had been warned of man - eaters in the area but neither Dave nor I took that too seriously . Well , that was a big mistake . (None, 3108)


This was not the Vietnam scenario of chopper in , quick patrol then chopper out . We ran up to twenty kilometres a day , literally running them out of the area . (None, 3511)


The tank driver turned off the road and chased us . The mechanical noise of the tank crashing over the small trees was a sound that I will never forget . ” (None, 3959)


Awaiting further instructions , the raiders went on a two - day hike back into the mountains of the Zambezi Valley escarpment , enjoying the sights and sounds of elephant , lion and buffalo as they marched . “ I always used to think to myself , ” remembers one of the men , “ that I hope peace comes soon and I can come back to these places as a visitor with my wife and family . Such beautiful scenery and so much game in places , (None, 4077)


“ You fire that thing , you fucking Dutchman , and I’ll shoot you myself ! ” (None, 4088)


“ The Renamo were a hard bunch . With such a long line of soldiers , some sick with malaria and other ailments , some wounded and with not much in the way of medical care , individuals would literally fall by the wayside while on the march . Unable to help themselves the others would stop only long enough to loot the casualty of everything of value then leave him to die naked . A completely different mentality . I found it heart - breaking walking at the end of the line seeing these men lying there , eyes wide open , pleading for help but there was nothing we could do . We just had to continue our march and leave them there . (None, 4195)


Members exchanged automatic rifles and machine guns for semi - automatic Star and Browning 9mm handguns . (None, 4557)


Adding to the Rhodesian challenges it was confirmed that British SAS operatives were masquerading as election monitors . To help them identify their opposite numbers in Rhodesia they brought with them at least one former member of the Rhodesian SAS then residing in the UK . (None, 4565)


“ We did a quick course with Special Branch , ” remembers Watt . “ It was a very good course on surveillance and I had a good team with me . We worked out which Brits were following us ; some were Brit SAS I think . I tried to get them to follow me out of Salisbury . I had two of my chaps with RPDs in the back seat and we were going to blow them away but they would not follow us in the dark . Lucky for them . (None, 4572)

