
For every one of us who needs to take the risk of being more open , there is another who needs to practise self - containment . For each person who needs to learn to trust more , there is another who needs to experiment with more discernment . (4, 40)


However in every successful course of psychotherapy , I notice that change happens in four areas : ‘ self - observation ’ , ‘ relating to others ’ , ‘ stress ’ and ‘ personal narrative ’ . 2 (12, 96)


Ask yourself, what am I feeling, what am I thinking, what am I doing, how am I breathing. Pause. Now what do I want next? (22, 149)


Damasio wrote up his findings about Elliot and other patients like him in his book Descartes ’ Error : Emotion , Reason and the Human Brain . (27, 191)


Remember , the idea is not to fight , and a good relationship is not about determining who is right and who is wrong . It’s about finding a way forward together . (64, 463)


‘ You can choose between being right , or being together ’ . As (64, 464)


High levels of stress result in panic or in the brain dissociating . Dissociation is a disconnection amongst our thoughts , sensations , feelings and actions – experienced as a type of blanking out . (75, 524)


The hormone dopamine is a key neurotransmitter in reward - reinforcement . We can stimulate its production in both healthy and unhealthy ways . The form of dopamine stimulation that I advocate is learning something new , and the thrill that comes with it – whether mastering a new musical instrument , succeeding with a new recipe , shooting a ball into a basket or learning to tell a successful joke . Dopamine production is also stimulated by addictive substances or activities , such as gambling . (82, 576)


We must be doing something genuinely new , and we must pay close attention , be emotionally engaged and keep at it . New pathways will form if two or more of these conditions are met , but we will ideally meet all four at once . (83, 583)


Do something new
Be emotionally engaged
Pay close attention
Keep at it (83, 585)


When a client in therapy presents a problem , the therapist often asks them to imagine that problem belonging to a friend and , if that was the case , how they would counsel that friend . (97, 669)


The hero of the opera is Hans Sachs , a cobbler , who persuades the Meistersinger that rules are only useful if they are flexible and applied when real need arises . Sachs listens to both sides , appreciates their opposing points of view and engages them in dialogue . He is a learned and thoughtful man who understands the need to steer a course between chaos and rigidity . (120, 866)


Extremes appear not to be the best way forward for sanity . (128, 898)

